EXCEL_UPLOAD.md, before:

# Excel Upload Feature

This feature allows you to create quiz sets by uploading Excel files (.xlsx or .xls) with questions and answers.

## Automatic Save (Production)

When properly configured with a GitHub token, the upload feature will **automatically**:
- Save the quiz JSON file to `public/data/quizzes/`
- Update `public/data/quiz-index.json` with the new quiz entry
- Create a commit to the repository
- Make the quiz immediately available in your app (after Vercel redeploys)

**No manual steps needed!** Just upload your Excel file and it's done.

### Setup for Automatic Save

To enable automatic save in production, add these environment variables in Vercel:

1. `GITHUB_TOKEN` - A GitHub Personal Access Token with repo access
2. `GITHUB_OWNER` - Your GitHub username (optional, auto-detected from Vercel)
3. `GITHUB_REPO` - Your repository name (optional, auto-detected from Vercel)
4. `GITHUB_BRANCH` - Target branch (optional, defaults to 'main')

**Creating a GitHub Token:**
1. Go to GitHub Settings → Developer settings → Personal access tokens → Tokens (classic)
2. Generate new token with `repo` scope
3. Copy the token and add it to Vercel environment variables

Without these environment variables, the feature falls back to manual mode (download JSON manually).

## How to Use

### 1. Access the Admin Page

Navigate to `/admin.html` on your deployed site or open `public/admin.html` locally.

### 2. Prepare Your Excel File

Create an Excel file with the following format:

| Column A (Question) | Column B (Answer) | Column C (Alternative Answers - Optional) |
|---------------------|-------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| What is the capital of France? | Paris | |
| What is 2 + 2? | 4 | four, Four |
| Who wrote Romeo and Juliet? | William Shakespeare | Shakespeare |

**Format Requirements:**
- **Column A**: Question text (required)
- **Column B**: Correct answer (required)
- **Column C**: Alternative acceptable answers, comma-separated (optional)
- First row can be headers or data (headers will be auto-detected)
- Empty rows will be automatically skipped
- You can have as many questions as needed

### 3. Upload the File

1. Click the "Choose Excel file or drag & drop" area, or drag your Excel file directly onto it
2. Optionally enter a custom quiz title (otherwise the filename will be used)
3. Click "Upload and Convert"

### 4. Download the Quiz JSON

After successful upload, you'll see:
- Quiz title
- Number of questions
- Preview of the generated JSON

You can then:
- **Download JSON**: Save the quiz file to your computer
- **Copy to Clipboard**: Copy the JSON for pasting elsewhere
- **Upload Another**: Create another quiz

### 5. Deploy the Quiz

**If automatic save is enabled:** The quiz is immediately available after Vercel redeploys (usually 1-2 minutes). No action needed!

**If automatic save is NOT enabled (manual mode):** To make the quiz available in your app:

1. Save the downloaded JSON file to `public/data/quizzes/` directory
2. Update `public/data/quiz-index.json` to include your new quiz:

```json
{
  "quizzes": [
    {
      "name": "Your Quiz Name",
      "file": "/data/quizzes/your-quiz-name.json",
      "description": "1 round, X questions"
    }
  ]
}
```

3. Commit and push the changes to deploy

## Generated Quiz Structure

The Excel file is automatically converted to the ICC Quiz Cards JSON format:

```json
{
  "metadata": {
    "title": "Quiz Title",
    "source": "excel_upload_2025-01-15",
    "date": "2025-01-15",
    "rounds": 1
  },
  "rounds": [
    {
      "round_number": 1,
      "round_name": "Quiz Title",
      "players": [
        {
          "player_number": 1,
          "questions": [
            {
              "question_number": 1,
              "question_text": "What is the capital of France?",
              "answer": "Paris",
              "accept": []
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

## API Endpoint

The upload is handled by the `/api/upload-quiz` serverless function.

**Endpoint**: `POST /api/upload-quiz`

**Request**: `multipart/form-data`
- `file`: Excel file (.xlsx or .xls)
- `title`: Optional quiz title

**Response**:
```json
{
  "success": true,
  "quiz": { /* quiz JSON object */ },
  "saved": true,
  "quizPath": "public/data/quizzes/quiz-name.json",
  "message": "Quiz saved to repository successfully"
}
```

- `saved`: Boolean indicating if the quiz was automatically saved to the repository
- `quizPath`: File path where the quiz was saved (only if `saved` is true)
- `message`: Success message (varies based on whether auto-save is enabled)

## Security Considerations

**Important**: The admin upload page should only be used by trusted administrators. Do not expose this page to untrusted users.

The xlsx library has known vulnerabilities (prototype pollution and ReDoS) that can be exploited with maliciously crafted Excel files. This is acceptable for internal/trusted use but should not be exposed to public users.

**Recommendations**:
- Only use this feature for your own quiz creation
- Do not allow untrusted users to upload files
- Consider adding authentication/authorization if deploying publicly
- Regularly update dependencies
- **Keep your GitHub token secure** - never commit it to your repository
- Use environment variables in Vercel to store the GitHub token
- The GitHub token should have minimal permissions (only `repo` scope for your quiz repository)

## Example Excel Template

You can create a template file with these columns:

1. Open Excel/Google Sheets
2. Add headers: `Question`, `Answer`, `Alternatives`
3. Fill in your quiz data
4. Save as `.xlsx`
5. Upload to the admin page

## Troubleshooting

**Error: "No file uploaded"**
- Make sure you've selected a file before clicking Upload

**Error: "Failed to process Excel file"**
- Check that your file is a valid .xlsx or .xls file
- Ensure questions and answers are in columns A and B
- Make sure the file isn't corrupted

**Quiz not showing up in app**
- Remember to add the quiz to `quiz-index.json`
- Check that the file is in the correct directory: `public/data/quizzes/`
- Verify the JSON is valid (use a JSON validator)

## Development

To run locally:

```bash
# Install dependencies
npm install

# Run with Vercel CLI (for serverless functions)
vercel dev
```

Then navigate to `http://localhost:3000/admin.html`

Commit message:

Move admin password to secure environment variable

EXCEL_UPLOAD.md, after:

# Excel Upload Feature

This feature allows you to create quiz sets by uploading Excel files (.xlsx or .xls) with questions and answers.

## Automatic Save (Production)

When properly configured with a GitHub token, the upload feature will **automatically**:
- Save the quiz JSON file to `public/data/quizzes/`
- Update `public/data/quiz-index.json` with the new quiz entry
- Create a commit to the repository
- Make the quiz immediately available in your app (after Vercel redeploys)

**No manual steps needed!** Just upload your Excel file and it's done.

### Setup for Automatic Save

To enable automatic save in production, add these environment variables in Vercel:

1. `GITHUB_TOKEN` - A GitHub Personal Access Token with repo access
2. `GITHUB_OWNER` - Your GitHub username (optional, auto-detected from Vercel)
3. `GITHUB_REPO` - Your repository name (optional, auto-detected from Vercel)
4. `GITHUB_BRANCH` - Target branch (optional, defaults to 'main')
5. `ADMIN_PASSWORD` - Admin password for accessing the upload page (required)

**Creating a GitHub Token:**
1. Go to GitHub Settings → Developer settings → Personal access tokens → Tokens (classic)
2. Generate new token with `repo` scope
3. Copy the token and add it to Vercel environment variables

**Setting Admin Password:**
1. Go to Vercel dashboard → Your project → Settings → Environment Variables
2. Add new variable: `ADMIN_PASSWORD` = `C@sas123` (or your preferred password)
3. Redeploy the project for changes to take effect

**Important:** The password is stored securely in Vercel environment variables and is never exposed in the code or browser.

Without these environment variables, the feature falls back to manual mode (download JSON manually).

## How to Use

### 1. Access the Admin Page

Navigate to `/admin.html` on your deployed site or open `public/admin.html` locally.

### 2. Prepare Your Excel File

Create an Excel file with the following format:

| Column A (Question) | Column B (Answer) | Column C (Alternative Answers - Optional) |
|---------------------|-------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| What is the capital of France? | Paris | |
| What is 2 + 2? | 4 | four, Four |
| Who wrote Romeo and Juliet? | William Shakespeare | Shakespeare |

**Format Requirements:**
- **Column A**: Question text (required)
- **Column B**: Correct answer (required)
- **Column C**: Alternative acceptable answers, comma-separated (optional)
- First row can be headers or data (headers will be auto-detected)
- Empty rows will be automatically skipped
- You can have as many questions as needed

### 3. Upload the File

1. Click the "Choose Excel file or drag & drop" area, or drag your Excel file directly onto it
2. Optionally enter a custom quiz title (otherwise the filename will be used)
3. Click "Upload and Convert"

### 4. Download the Quiz JSON

After successful upload, you'll see:
- Quiz title
- Number of questions
- Preview of the generated JSON

You can then:
- **Download JSON**: Save the quiz file to your computer
- **Copy to Clipboard**: Copy the JSON for pasting elsewhere
- **Upload Another**: Create another quiz

### 5. Deploy the Quiz

**If automatic save is enabled:** The quiz is immediately available after Vercel redeploys (usually 1-2 minutes). No action needed!

**If automatic save is NOT enabled (manual mode):** To make the quiz available in your app:

1. Save the downloaded JSON file to `public/data/quizzes/` directory
2. Update `public/data/quiz-index.json` to include your new quiz:

```json
{
  "quizzes": [
    {
      "name": "Your Quiz Name",
      "file": "/data/quizzes/your-quiz-name.json",
      "description": "1 round, X questions"
    }
  ]
}
```

3. Commit and push the changes to deploy

## Generated Quiz Structure

The Excel file is automatically converted to the ICC Quiz Cards JSON format:

```json
{
  "metadata": {
    "title": "Quiz Title",
    "source": "excel_upload_2025-01-15",
    "date": "2025-01-15",
    "rounds": 1
  },
  "rounds": [
    {
      "round_number": 1,
      "round_name": "Quiz Title",
      "players": [
        {
          "player_number": 1,
          "questions": [
            {
              "question_number": 1,
              "question_text": "What is the capital of France?",
              "answer": "Paris",
              "accept": []
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

## API Endpoint

The upload is handled by the `/api/upload-quiz` serverless function.

**Endpoint**: `POST /api/upload-quiz`

**Request**: `multipart/form-data`
- `file`: Excel file (.xlsx or .xls)
- `title`: Optional quiz title

**Response**:
```json
{
  "success": true,
  "quiz": { /* quiz JSON object */ },
  "saved": true,
  "quizPath": "public/data/quizzes/quiz-name.json",
  "message": "Quiz saved to repository successfully"
}
```

- `saved`: Boolean indicating if the quiz was automatically saved to the repository
- `quizPath`: File path where the quiz was saved (only if `saved` is true)
- `message`: Success message (varies based on whether auto-save is enabled)

## Security Considerations

**Important**: The admin upload page should only be used by trusted administrators. Do not expose this page to untrusted users.

The xlsx library has known vulnerabilities (prototype pollution and ReDoS) that can be exploited with maliciously crafted Excel files. This is acceptable for internal/trusted use but should not be exposed to public users.

**Recommendations**:
- Only use this feature for your own quiz creation
- Do not allow untrusted users to upload files
- Consider adding authentication/authorization if deploying publicly
- Regularly update dependencies
- **Keep your GitHub token secure** - never commit it to your repository
- Use environment variables in Vercel to store the GitHub token
- The GitHub token should have minimal permissions (only `repo` scope for your quiz repository)

## Example Excel Template

You can create a template file with these columns:

1. Open Excel/Google Sheets
2. Add headers: `Question`, `Answer`, `Alternatives`
3. Fill in your quiz data
4. Save as `.xlsx`
5. Upload to the admin page

## Troubleshooting

**Error: "No file uploaded"**
- Make sure you've selected a file before clicking Upload

**Error: "Failed to process Excel file"**
- Check that your file is a valid .xlsx or .xls file
- Ensure questions and answers are in columns A and B
- Make sure the file isn't corrupted

**Quiz not showing up in app**
- Remember to add the quiz to `quiz-index.json`
- Check that the file is in the correct directory: `public/data/quizzes/`
- Verify the JSON is valid (use a JSON validator)

## Development

To run locally:

```bash
# Install dependencies
npm install

# Run with Vercel CLI (for serverless functions)
vercel dev
```

Then navigate to `http://localhost:3000/admin.html`
